feat(docs): rewrite adding forms documentation (#32213)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/how-to/adding-common-features/adding-forms.md

    href: "https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-functions-beta/tree/main/examples/basic-form"
---

Forms are common to capture user information from site visitors. They range in complexity from simple newsletter email capture boxes, to detailed lead capture forms and signup pages requiring visitors to enter their first & last name, email, and several additional self-identificaton questions.

> The humble `<form>` elemenet has evolved a lot since it was created in 1995. By default, a `<form>` stores its input internally and refresh the page when you `submit`. Today, developers generally want to store input in Javascript so you can validate fields and send the data to a third-party system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The humble `<form>` element has evolved a lot since it was created in 1995. By default, a `<form>` stores its input internally and refresh the page when you `submit`. Today, developers generally want to store input in Javascript so you can validate fields and send the data to a third-party system.
```

Website forms have several "concerns" like data entry storage, validating fields, form submission, form storage, and other event triggers. This documentation will walk through each concern.

> Forms in Gatsby are built on top of React, so in a couple places we'll be linking to the React docs for code examples. In addition, the React ecosystem also offers some popular, well-maintained libraries like [Formik](https://github.com/jaredpalmer/formik) or [Final Form](https://github.com/final-form/react-final-form) to speed up your development process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby uses React, so in a couple places we'll be linking to the React docs for code examples. In addition, the React ecosystem also offers some popular, well-maintained libraries like [Formik](https://github.com/jaredpalmer/formik) or [Final Form](https://github.com/final-form/react-final-form) which help with more complex forms.
```

## Form concerns

### Client-side data entry

> When users type into the input, you want to persist their input, as well as store it in a JavaScript field that will later be available to your form validation and submission logic.

Author: ```suggestion
When users type into the input, you want to store it in a JavaScript field that will later be available to your form validation and submission logic.
```

> When users type into the input, you want to persist their input, as well as store it in a JavaScript field that will later be available to your form validation and submission logic.

Reviewer: what do you mean by "persist their input"?

Author: great question 🤔

The "Controlled Components" section of the React documentation [provides a good code example here](https://reactjs.org/docs/forms.html#controlled-components).

```
  handleChange(event) {
    this.setState({value: event.target.value});
  }
  ...
   render() {
    return (
      ...
      <input type="text" value={this.state.value} onChange={this.handleChange} />
      ...
    )
   }
```

The `handleChange` function takes the value being entered by the user and stores it internally in the component state.

### Field validation

Often you'll want to, eg, ensure that the entry in an "Email" field is a valid email address.

If you need to do validation of one or multiple fields, you may want to use a library like Formik, since adding logic and styling around error messages tends to be fairly boilerplate and repetitive.

### Form submission

> The default behavior of the HTML form element is to send a POST request to the URL and refresh the page. You'll want to prevent the default behavior and send the information to whatever backend you're using.

Reviewer: Probably should directly mention Gatsby Functions here (and throughout this doc) e.g. link to https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/reference/functions/getting-started/#forms

Author: Good point! Included it a couple sentences lower in the section.

You do this by passing a function that prevents page refresh as an `onSubmit` prop. Again from the ["Controlled Components" section of the React docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/forms.html#controlled-components):

```
  ...
  handleSubmit(event) {
    event.preventDefault();
  }
  ...
  render() {
    return (
      ...
      <form onSubmit={this.handleSubmit}>
      ...
    )
  }
  ...
```

The `handleSubmit` function calls `preventDefault()` on the event which prevents the page from refreshing. After this, you'll want to insert desired behavior, like sending the data to a third-party service.

> You may want to make addition changes to visual form display after submit, like disabling the form submit button after submission, showing a spinning wheel, or changing the button color.

Author: ```suggestion
You may want to make addition changes to visual form display after submit, like disabling the form submit button after submission, showing a spinning wheel, or changing the button color.

If you need to use any sort of authentication token to submit data, you can use Gatsby Functions (Gatsby's implementation of serverless functions) to [run this logic while keeping any your credentials secure](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/reference/functions/getting-started/#forms).
```

### Triggering additional events

Sometimes you'll want to trigger additional events off of your form submissions that require authenticated calls to a third-party service.

Some examples:

- sending emails from a service like SendGrid
- server-side validation on form submission (eg, is this email already in our system?)

> Users tend to handle these situations in two ways: either they send data to a middleware service like Zapier that can trigger multiple events based on data submission. Alternately, they use serverless functions to run this logic while keeping any authentication credentials secure.

Author: ```suggestion
Users tend to handle these situations in two ways: either they send data to a middleware service like Zapier that can trigger multiple events based on data submission. Alternately, they use Gatsby Functions (Gatsby's implementation of serverless functions) to run this logic while keeping any authentication credentials secure.
```

```
  ...
  handleSubmit(event) {
    event.preventDefault();
  }
  ...
  render() {
    return (
      ...
      <form onSubmit={this.handleSubmit}>
      ...
    )
  }
  ...
```

The `handleSubmit` function calls `preventDefault()` on the event which prevents the page from refreshing. After this, you'll want to insert desired behavior, like sending the data to a third-party service.

You may want to make addition changes to visual form display after submit, like disabling the form submit button after submission, showing a spinning wheel, or changing the button color.

If you need to use any sort of authentication token to submit data, you can use Gatsby Functions (Gatsby's implementation of serverless functions) to [run this logic while keeping any your credentials secure](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/reference/functions/getting-started/#forms).

### Triggering additional events

Sometimes you'll want to trigger additional events off of your form submissions that require authenticated calls to a third-party service.

Some examples:

- sending emails from a service like SendGrid
- server-side validation on form submission (eg, is this email already in our system?)

> Users tend to handle these situations in two ways: either they send data to a middleware service like Zapier that can trigger multiple events based on data submission. Alternately, they use Gatsby Functions (Gatsby's implementation of serverless functions) to run this logic while keeping any authentication credentials secure.

Author: ```suggestion
Users tend to handle these situations in two ways: either they send data to a middleware service like Zapier that can trigger multiple events based on data submission. Alternately, they use Gatsby Functions to run this logic while keeping auth credentials secure.
```
